Hello everyone. Paul can hear me. I can hear you. Yeah, can you hear jittery, is it okay? Let's see what about my volume? Is it good enough? Yeah, you're all good.
Thank you, actually get out of the camera. Hi everyone, we are getting started. How is everyone doing today? All right, give us a minute here as we get set up for our sorbonne developer Workshop. We are writing our first smart contract on sorbonne and we have Morgan and Paul joining us on stream here today to do this Workshop. Hey, Morgan, hey Paul, how are you all doing? Hey, everyone doing good. Yeah, going good here. How are you new here? I'm doing well. I am in the SDF office. It's been so exciting. The DevRel team has been expanding and we're onboarding so many new developers and it's been exciting. Sorbond's really changing
And we're innovating, and I can't wait to see what more is going to come out of this. But all right, oh, you were at Paris blockchain week, right, Morgan? So what is this? That's true, I, yes here. I feel like this is what the SDF office looks like. Everyone, anyone- yes, I think we should do like a live stream tour of SDF's California SF headquarters. I think that would make a fun: stream everybody's work and see what they're doing, just like, pop around and interact with people. I'd love to hear that. What's with them with the Media Kit in the background? Yeah, we'll find out with. Yeah, I know, but so many comments here. Cool single monitors only. Yeah, y'all, we have
Only single monitors around in office. I will let them know. We need curved monitors. We need all that cool Tech. But, yeah, all right, without further Ado, Paul Morgan, I will let you all kick off about this workshop and talk about what you presented at Paris blockchain week, and I'll let you start off. Paul cool, yeah, I think I'm presenting here. How do I make that happen on the screen? There we go. Yeah, cool, that looked like it a second ago. Yeah, that's the one. Cool. Yeah, welcome everybody. Good morning, good evening, good night. Wherever you happen to be, welcome to live stream. I'm writing your first smart contract on sorbom. Here's what we're gonna be going through today. So, first off, we'll do a bit of an intro. We'll talk a bit about what is Soroban. For those that don't know, we'll have a cool hello world demo from Morgan and we'll talk a little bit about why Soroban's important, why
It matters, why it's good, why you should build everything on it. And then we'll have a bit more for Morgan on his kind of journey and how he got to sorbonne and how I got involved with all this, and then Tyler will share a bit on how you can get involved, and then I will wrap up from there and we'll do some questions and stuff at the end. So first off, who are we right? My name is Paul. I will start there. I'm a Staff engineer at the Stellar Development Foundation, which means I get to work on Soroban every day, building and making it happen for all of you. So I'm really excited to be here today to share some of the stuff that I've been working on. What is the Stellar Development Foundation? If you don't know and you've somehow stumbled into this stream, anyway, the SDF works with the Stellar Community, which is all of you to build the Stellar network. is a fast and reliable L1 blockchain with finality in
Just five seconds. The network's been live since about 2015. It and has seen sustained real world usage of 150 transactions a second with literally no problem just cruising along, which is pretty crazy to think about. It has a global network of anchors- it's what we call- which are on and off ramps, issuing on chain versions of assets from the real world, including cash access, which we'll talk about later. And for the last year, we've been building something new: sarban. So what is Soroban? So sorbonne is a new add on to the Stellar network. Traditionally, the vanilla stoneware network didn't have Smart contracts. There were. There was a few L2 attempts, right like Turrets that some of you might know, but they had some issues around that, like atomicity, yeah, and other things like that. So we wanted to open up more decentralized Innovation to the network and to open up new opportunities to the underserved and unbanked populations that Stellar's built to serve.
And I mean my big thing is payments is- such a small part of the financial world. It's like an important thing to get right, but it's just kind of the base layer of what we can build here. So we announced the project that would come to be known as Soroban back in January of last year. Since then we've shared eight, I think, iterative releases- yeah, I want to preview eight. Now onto our experimental test net, known as futurenet, so devs can experiment, learn and contribute to the design discussions. We've been regularly running a program called sore bonathon- we'll hear a bit more about that later from Tyler- and we regularly discuss design choices and onboard new devs to the community on our Discord. The community interactions with all of you lovely folks who are now in the Stellar Community- sorry, I don't make the rules but I will enforce them. So you are going to be part of the community. Now. The community interactions and the public input has been really exciting to see. That's been my favorite part of this journey. It's been absolutely mind boggling
It's impacted almost everything about sorbonne, right from naming to authentication- how does that work- to how Soroban should integrate with the existing vanilla Stellar network and while sarban isn't tightly covered, coupled to Stellar specifically, it is designed to work well with the network. So a bunch of stuff on that point. It's written end to end in Rust for Speed, efficiency and access to the ecosystem that exists there. It comes with a bunch of plug and play, SDKs for simple to complicated authorization models, and it's built to scale right because it has to keep up with the rest of the existing network. It can't slow down the network. But the thing I'm probably most excited about in Soroban and looking forward to seeing is how it's empowering all of you in the community. Now that you can build on Stellar completely Unchained- hey, I'm sorry if I didn't make that joke. Tyler said he'd fire me, so it had to happen
Right at this point I'd like to introduce Morgan. He's a founder of useorbonda app. He's a Community member who's been building some incredible stuff to help onboard other devs to Soroban and he's going to show us a bit about what he's been working on. Hello everyone, I'm gonna start buying. Sharing my screen should have done this earlier. All right. So here's a thing that every developer starts their programming Journeys with. We all like to say hello and we all like to say hello to the world as the very first thing that we do in our programs- and you know, almost everyone starts their Journey that way- and, in fact, the time it takes for someone to say hello world in a specific programming environment maybe the determining Factor if they're
Going to continue their Journey in that platform or not. So I definitely want you guys to stick around for the rest of the talk, so I'll just get started with the hello world part. All right, so what do we have here? As Paul mentioned, I am the founder of usurubond app which is this tool that you see right here. It is a developer playground for saurabhan smart contracts. Now, what do we see on screen exactly? Well, I'm logged in, so I have access to the Gated Alpha here and I have the ability to create a new project. So let's go ahead and do that. New project pops up and let's go ahead and delete everything, because we're going to start from scratch. What's this environment all about? Well,
First we have a code Editor to the left here. This is where we'll just put our rust slash sorobong. This playground runs on Rust and the rest soar about SDK you'll, as you continue your journey, you'll find out that there's other SDKs for sword Bond available. For now we're going to deal with rust because that's the sort of reference implementation. All right. So we have the code editor, we'll put our rest in and sort by and then we have some widgets. So right now, console is open, code is open and let's get started with the hello world part. So how do we do that in rest? Well, I guess we write a hello function and we call the print line macro and say, hello, okay, compile it. And that worked. This is a rest program as it should be compiled,
And I abstract all the details for creating cargo projects and the defining targets and so forth. So you just sort of write some code and click compile in. You know, you're Off to the Races. Morgan, I'm going to interrupt you for just one second. Can you zoom in a little bit more, because we can't see it? A little bit more. How about now? A lot more, yeah, a little bit more. I would say, yeah, it will be unusable if I zoom in any further. So I do apart for anyone: or we can hide my face, there's a lot of stuff on screen that's not the code. So we can just sort of focus on the code. Here we go, there we go, sweeter, like I'm almost blind. And there you go. Okay, sweet, we got one confirmation. I can see it. Fine, carry on. And everyone can hide the faces because, like, the vertical space might be useful,
Nothing but the screen share. All right, perfect, thank you. All right, carrying on. So print line hello didn't work. Well, at least it compiled and didn't produce what we wanted. Why is the question? And well, we're working in a soybean environment, right? Soroban expects a certain kind of format for these things to work and everything that we want to be able to call has to live in a contract. So contracts are struck in. Rest, we're going to declare a contract struct. This name can be anything you want: call contract because it couldn't come up with a better name. All right, so we go ahead and Define an implementation for contract. Let's go ahead and copy this from here.
Okay, all right, compile this again. And that worked again, no compiler errors. But the problem is we still don't see any hellos popping up. So that's not great. Ideally, you want to work with the SDK here, because you know, a structure like this is not really sort of buying. We got to tell it to do a little bit more, so for that we're going to use the Soroban SDK and we're going to import the contract implementation macro and that's going to do a bunch of things. But essentially this will convert this implementation right here into a Soroban contract. And okay, we have a few errors over here. By the way, Russ is super famous for really good compiler errors and in this
Environment, which is enabled by Soroban, the way it's designed to leverage webassembly and rust, so we'll get those beautiful Russ. Compiler errors and we can see that there's some problems with the Panic implementation, although it's not entirely clear what's going on. So I'll just sort of skip the mystery here and solve this problem by finding this macro right here. So contracts on the blockchain have to be super efficient in how to use the available Ledger space and rest programs. Even though they're pretty light, they still carry a bunch of stuff that we don't really need as part of our contracts. So to eliminate everything that we don't need and just get the rest that you know, the basic rest of that is required for
Contract logic, will we declare the no STD macro. This unfortunately removes the ability for us to use the print line macro to print this stuff, and okay, so let's get rid of that. Now we've back to a solid compiling contract here and let's go ahead and declare this function as a public function. Now we have something on screen up here that's looking like a button. So in this actions widget, which is sort of the a third of this interface in the middle, is where you will be able to click and interact with every function that your contract declares. So our contract right here declares a single hello function. We can call it and we'll see in the console a return value. So it's implied that a function without an explicit return value returns none in
Rest. So same applies here and we're going to return value. Now I guess we can leverage this return Dynamic to finally say hello to everyone tuning in, and for that we will need a special type. So again, since we can't use the rest strain- it's unavailable- we have to figure a different way to carry our information and for that we're going to use a symbol, which is an efficient data type in sorobind for storing alphanumeric characters, essentially all the letters of the alphabet plus the digits and the underscore. So what we're going to do with symbol is we're going to initialize a short symbol that says hello, and short just means that this sequence of characters will be able to fit in a single 64 bit value, which is pretty
Important when it comes to this context. Let's recompile this again and oh, thank you, rust compiler. We are returning a value, so let's make sure that we declare what we're returning and let's call this all right. So we have, a return value. Hello from this function right here. And this is sort of your basic, most basic implementation of a sorobind contract that says hello to anyone tuning in. Now let's make it a little bit more spicy and let's use a little bit more of the environment here. So let's say we're going to log a value. Everybody loves blogging. As a- you know someone coming in from a web developer background, I use console log all the time and console log is the best. So
We have an equivalent in sorobind. It's called log, the log macro, and we're going to declare a new function called hello2. And what are we going to do here? We're going to gonna say hello to a specific name. It's going to be a symbol and we're not going to return anything. Okay, so how do we interact with this log macro? Well, it's a macro, so we use a bang, and then the first argument is the environment within which we're logging this value. And you'll get used to this concept of every single function that your contract has that interacts with anything else. Anything in the outside world will have to have an environment as the very first argument. It's kind of like your access to everything. So log accepts the first argument being the environment. So we're just
Going to pass, in reference to the environment, next up we have a string and we're going to use hello, bang, and then we're going to provide the name. Let's compile this. Oh, we're missing environment in this import, and a handy feature is, if you're having problems with a specific type or you're missing something, you can go ahead and click links right inside of your compiler widget. That will take you to the documentation. So it's an easy feedback loop. So now that we've imported an environment, we can recompile this again and try saying hello to twitch- I guess is where most of you are. And in this console widget we can see that in between hello too, which is the function that we're calling, and the return value, we have a log that says
Hello, twitch. All right. So I'm almost done with the first demo. Anyone and everyone that's tuning in you can actually test this on your phone. So this is going to be a multi modal demo and for that I'm gonna take my phone here. So I just popped up this share modal. I'm going to take my phone. This is an actual phone I have here. Bring up the camera. Hey, everyone and I'll go ahead and look at the QR code here. Tap on usurabond app and we can see we're taken to a version of usurubundan app, which is mobile optimized. And you know, we gotta work on mobile experiences just as much as a desktop experience and someone that's designing these apps. We've got to be mindful that that's where our audience is. So this kind of interface will allow users to test this contract anywhere
They are, especially on the mobile phone. So we have access to the same sort of widgets. We have the console open and actions is a sheet down at the bottom. We can go ahead and call hello like we did before. Quick access down at the bottom to the previously called functions, and we can call hello to and let's do twitch, confirm. And then we can call this function with the same arguments if we want to, or we can change the arguments and do YouTube. Okay, all right. So that does conclude the demo. Everyone that scan the QR code and we're able to interact with the app here. Congratulations if. Right now, this is still in a gated Alpha. If you want access to the current build, please tweet me on at sorobine Dev on Twitter and I'll make that happen.
All right, so I'm handing it off Back To You, Paul. We go. Okay, I'm back. Thanks, Morgan. Can we get the slides up again? Cool, thank you, yeah, so that's. Morgan has shown us the basics of Soroban, but I want to go into what actually makes it so special and what makes it so exciting here. So, first off, it is batteries included for devs. That's our goal here, right, when we're designing it, everything we're thinking about designing it. That's our goal and that means we're including everything from Storage to authentication and authorization Frameworks to token minting and transfers. All that's baked in, right, it's ready to go, so you can focus on your
Application and not spend ages trying to figure out how to like verify an ed 25519 signature right, like. You shouldn't have to worry about that. And secondly, unlike pretty much any other smart Contracting platform out there, because we're launching on the Stellar network, you get access to all the existing assets on the vanilla Stellar network- and I want to address a comment in chat, I think from Matthias said I should call it classic and not vanilla. And I'm calling it vanilla for a very specific reason: right, because the existing Stellar network is not going anywhere. Right, that's still all staying there. It's not being deprecated. It's not a classic thing, right, it's just a different flavor of the same thing. It'll still be the fastest, cheapest way to use the network. But if you need a bit more power, that's what Soroban's for. Okay, but building on the existing Stellar network means that from day one of launch, your smart contracts can hold and use USDC right and many other assets that are
Already on the network. They also have access to Stellar's cash on and off ramp via our partnership with MoneyGram, which gives, which works in over 200 countries worldwide- right, so, putting this together, we could think of someone, let's say Julia. Right, she doesn't have a bank account. She can go to her local MoneyGram location, deposit cash into the kiosk. She receives USDC on the Stellar network in her wallet and now, with Soroban, she can take that USDC and deposit it into- I mean a lot of things. Right, whatever you're building, but let's say, an income generating DeFi protocol where she receives a portion of transaction fees for providing liquidity. Right, the partnership between Stellar's anchor network and MoneyGram allows users like Julia to move cash straight from their physical real wallet to a DeFi protocol and vice versa, which is something that I don't think's ever been seen on any other blockchain network so far. Yeah, and the third Point here I want to talk about, what makes Soroban super special
Is the scaling optimizations that we're doing. So, when designing Soroban, we've been able to learn from the state of the art and hand pick the best solutions from each one. So we've designed the transaction execution model, the scale across multiple cores. We've calibrated the fee model to maximize throughput and minimize cost while protecting the existing Stellar network traffic. So we've designed a lot of optimizations around the contracts themselves as well that you don't see on every other chain. So, for example, if you look at near- not to pick on them, I love near, but they do this in the near contracts- you need to do your own serialization, the deserialization of arguments when you get stuff in and out. That means you need to compile that into your contract and deploy it as well, right, so you need to include that library in Soroban. We've pushed as much as we can out to the host environment where we can say: batteries included, right, which lets us massively reduce the contract size. And you don't need to pay to deploy that code. Or your
Users don't need to pay to run it, right, We can take that a little bit further with built in contracts. So we have an idea in Soroban of built in contracts similar to like pre compiles you might know of us on other network. So currently this is just for the standard asset contract and it means that it runs Ultra fast and cheap right and it lets contract standardize on the interface within the ecosystem and that's the standard asset contract. That we have in Soroban is how Stellar assets are exposed in Soroban. They look just like any other contract to your contract, so it's really easy to integrate with existing Stellar assets. The last thing here: that's really cool. We're actually working on solving State bloat with our state expiration model. So on other chains you store some data on chain and it's there forever right. Well, forever right. In air quotes we have a rent based system with
Evictions and Restorations to ensure the Chain's working data set stays as lean as possible. So once your rent expires your data gets evicted and you can pay to have it restored back on chain if you need it. We can do a deep dive on that another day. It's a bit involved and actually we're still designing some of those elements right now, literally right now, on the call on Discord. So at this point I think Morgan can introduce this a bit: how stateful contracts work on sarban and get some of the basics of those in foreign. I'm Paul's back too. Hey, Paul,
I am muscle back. Yeah, we're waiting for my screen share. You are waiting for a screen share of Morgan. There you go. Okay, all right, thank you anyway. Yeah, thank you, Paul. So, like Paul mentioned, there's quite a bit of innovation going on sword I'm, and the deeper you go into it, the more you can sort of understand. Like you mentioned, there's a design discussion going on right now. We're about to wrap up. Every week, I think they go on, but anyhow, let's discuss the sore month State of Mind, specifically when it comes to storage and preserving things in The Ledger. So as I open this up, I want to hide my face and then focus on the code again, if
All right, perfect. So we we're back to a brand new project. I think we should rename this to: so we're working on the state, on the sword State, okay, so sooner or later, every developer finds themselves in a situation where their application is not working as expected, I would say: raise your hand if that happened to you, but I can't see you. So I assume everyone's had this problem and we all know the techniques of how to solve these things, like unit testing or logging intermittent values- using break points is a cool way to inspect stack frames and so forth- but unfortunately, smart contract developers often don't have a rapid workflow for finding bugs
Or faults in the contracts and you know this leaves them with the only option of: hey, I want to test something out. Well, what do I take? The current code for the contract that I have and I either one of two options: I deploy this to the test net of your blockchain that you're working on and I test it against the wallet, and that's going to be, if you're a very efficient, under a minute or it could take a little longer. Or your second option: if the blockchain is well equipped for developers, let's say you can probably deploy to a local Docker running instance. So that's all fine and dandy, but air is the limit and folks, I guess, tend to not test as much as they're used to because of all the hurdles. And so Soroban takes the challenge, hit on by providing
A guest environment right in the SDK. So you'll be able to see in the documentation, if you follow along this path, where you read a contract and immediately you read a unit test for a function, and this is using your regular rust cargo unit tests. With usurubon app I leverage that functionality of the of an environment provide features to rapidly test your contracts. So right here we're gonna explore. State because let's you know, face it, if we're writing hello world, probably bugs won't affect anything too much. If we're dealing with State, then bugs all of a sudden become an issue. All right. So let's begin. How do we store something on The Ledger? We're gonna head and start with the same
No STD. So we're not going to import the standard Library. We're going to use the critical elements like contract implementation and environment Within. You know, and let's grab a simple as well from the SDK and we're going to declare another contract on track, okay. And then we're going to implement this contract with a couple of functions. Let's clear this upper way contract implementation, all right. So what do we want to test to sort of showcase this? Well, first, let's compile often, right, never too often to compile. We're going to have some data in the storage and on The Ledger and we're going to save and retrieve that data. So
We're going to have a couple of functions. So let's declare save as the one that will put data Into The Ledger and we're gonna explore a number- it's gonna be u32. Now, save is going to return the same number, just for the sake of it, I guess. And we're gonna load a number environment and it's going to return that number. So it's essentially save and load, two functions for this contract. Let's compile this again. Make sure nothing breaks. Oh, okay, well, I guess I compiled it a little too early. Let's return some value here, okay. So we have
Something of an issue. I remove this. Let's make sure this compiles again. Let me back out of this. Oh, we don't need to back out of this. We're just not returning a value before. Should have trusted the rest compiler errors. All right. So we call save. It takes in a number and, by the way, this is one of those nice abstractions that you get with an environment like usurubund app let's say, a function takes in some arguments, right, in this case it takes in a number argument that's a u32. Well, we have a nice modal that we can input our number to confirm and that's going to call our function. As far as integrating into soribine,
There's another nice feature that's part of the, I guess, Soroban contract specification. So when you compile the contract, there's some amount of that byte code that's compiled, allocated for specifications. So let's say save something, rather save a number to The Ledger. Okay, let's compile this again. We can see that the modal now incorporates our comment for that function to describe what exactly this number does or what exactly this function does. So we're going to click confirm and let's add a another specification here or the docs for this function. Load a number from the layer, pile this again and oh, it doesn't take any arguments.
It's not going to display that modal. That's fine, all right, let's return the number as our first exercise. It's gonna be u32 and 42. We got 42 in the console here and right. So now the magic part. How do we take the number that we provided in our modal here and put it into storage? Wow, we need a certain key, something to store it under, and for that we're gonna declare a constant and it's going to be a symbol value. That's why I'm imported symbol and it's going to be. I'm not original with names. Under these circumstances, I'm just going to use storage and over here we're going to pick the same
Environment that we've used before for logging and we're going to reference storage. Okay, compile this. Oh, about the year I was expecting. So storage is a method, not a field, as we can see inside of this error message. We can go ahead and inspect what exactly storage is in the documentation and let's see exactly how to use it. So we can see that there is a set function under storage. It takes a key and a value. Okay, so, with this new knowledge here, since this is a method, not a field, we're going to call This And since we observe that it has a public function set, we're going to call that set function to store what we're storing. So we're going to provide storage as the key, right,
And we're going to provide number, Something That We're storing or the value of this. So, save 42. Confirm, all right. How do we know that we did store this correctly? Well, that's why we have this load function here. And how do we retrieve something? Right, we used set to store it. How do we retrieve it? Well, we can go back to the documentation real quick and see that there is a get function associated with storage and it returns an option. That's a result that potentially has that value. So there's, you'll see that there's some unwrapping that needs to happen. Oh, so we go ahead and reference that same storage, and call the get method, and we want to get the value under storage, the key. So what do we get? We get
An error because we're trying to return a u32, so let's return to u32. Now we get another area that says we want to have a u32, but we get an option. So whenever we're getting a value from Storage on sorobond, any kind of in a store buying contract, we don't know whether the value is there and we don't know whether that value is the value that we're going to return, in this case a u32, or it could be a symbol, we just don't know. So we can go ahead and unwrap this option and see if that works well. Then there's the question of returning a result. So at this point we unwrap the option. We're sure that there's a value there, but we're not sure whether that value is a u32 value. So we can do clever unwrapping here. But I'm just going to do a silly unwrapping so it panics if it's not a u32 and let's
Compile this again. So let's go ahead and Save 111 and load, okay. So we just put a number onto The Ledger under a specific key and we retrieved that number from The Ledger- we had an experiment with 420- and load the value, do something else. It works okay. So there's a complication that I want to implement here, and it's a little bit different from what we did during Paris blockchain week. This is something that tolmer told me to do, and so I'm just going to see if this works. If it doesn't, well, hey, this is a demo, these things break. So here's the gist I want to store a number for a specific account, so
I want to store numbers under accounts. I just don't want to store a single number. I want to store it as many numbers as I have accounts. So we're going to modify this save function here a little bit. We're going to take in a user argument or parameter. That's called user. Let's type address, so address refers to any valid blocking address on the Stellar blockchain, and then we're going to take in a number, we're going to return the same value and let's just see what this does. So if I call Save, I'm greeted with this second field here. So use oribon. You know, this modal expands to however many arguments that your function takes. And there's another cool abstraction here: when dealing with accounts on the blockchain, it can be like really tricky for someone just get getting started, right, how do I know how
To generate one? Do I need the private or the secret key here? That's a lot for someone that's, you know, into JavaScript or something. So for that reason, you saw a line app completely abstracts away interactions with accounts by using just regular names. So how many users does the system have? It has three users: Alex, Bart and Cali. You can select either one, and that in the background abstracts it away into a specific address within the back, within the current environment which is running in your browser. All right, so we select Alex one. So nothing happened really. We just, you know, have a parameter that we're calling this function with, but we're not using it yet. So let's try and use this. Okay. So, under storage, instead of putting everything into the same key, let's try and
Use user. Okay, so let's compile this thing, get compiled and let's call Alex and let's do pen, okay, so that sort of kind of worked. But how do we sort of debug this? Right, we can probably do a log here, although maybe we should just use the load function. Okay, I'll just do a little function here. So when loading, previously we only had one key and we have any number of keys that correspond to each user. So instead of using storage, we're going to use user. Here's an experiment. So let's, we saved. I think we saved. Let's save 10 under Alex again. So let's
Load Alex. Oh, we got a 10. So that worked. Let's try. Bart, it trapped, okay. So the Trap means that the value doesn't exist, but we explicitly tell this thing to unwrap, not caring about the underlying value. So we can go ahead and sort of test this out. So here's this log macro that we used before and call this with an arrow, just to have some string value in there and let's see what that returns. We probably need to do some matching here.
Foreign type. I think I'm going a little over the description here, but the point being is that we can store values under whatever key that we want, and the key can be anything. In this case, I just displayed that it can be a specific address, so we'll just go over each user. Alex is going to have 11, Bart is going to have 22 and Cali is going to have 33.
And let's go ahead and check each one. So, Alex 11. Okay, Cali 33 and Bart is 22. So, this is much more elegant than what we had during Pierce blockchain week. Were you storing values under specific usernames? Thank you, Tomer, for this suggestion and sort of the nice deviation from the standard here. All right. So that concludes my second demo for the Soroban state of mind. If anyone wants to again experiment with this, please tweet me on Twitter at soribandev, and I'll make sure you have access. Thank you so much, Morgan Tyler. Yeah, let me bring Tyler onto stream. Howdy Tyler, how are you? Hello? All right, let's bring up your screen here. And, nice, tell us all about the 100
Million dollars. Two opportunities sounds very interesting, so I'll let you take it off. Yeah, don't let me talk about much. They do. Let me talk about the money. So we've got basically two main opportunities here for engaging with Soroban right now. So we're in this phase between being on the future net, moving to test net, eventually be on mainnet later on this year. But while we're in this phase of developing Soroban and really trying to understand how to build it, in this malleable stage of solving difficult problems, and trying to build the bless the best blockchain smart contract value transfer protocol in the world, there's some unique opportunities here, and I'm going to talk about two inside of this 100 million dollar Adoption Fund that the sdfs put out. One is the one that I'm responsible for and that's fast, cheap and out of control. It's kind of a. It's primarily an
Educational content generation engine where you can learn rust, smart contract development, how those two things come together under the sorobond umbrella. Right now it's a game that really takes you through Soroban contract development with the objective of trying to build fast contracts, cheap contracts and out of control contracts. Over the next few months, this is we're dropping a little bit of alpha today- we're going to be migrating a lot more attention to fast, cheap and out of control for sorobond development. Stellar Quest is going to become really for a vanilla or, if you're on team classic seller, that's where that education is going to be- and then for Soroban related material. It'll all be living on Fast, cheap and out of control. So make sure to keep an eye out on that. And the second one would be the Stellar Community Fund. Right, so we got our fast Jeep and out of
Control. That would be your site for that- fca00c or ooc, I have all the domains for this. And then the second one: for the folks that are developing protocols or startups wanting to migrate existing DeFi protocols, Etc, over to the sarban ecosystem, the seller Community Fund is the place for you. We've really been optimizing Anka and the team have been optimizing the Community Fund for both the vanilla, classic, Stellar applications as well as Soroban applications. So there's a really nice clean process for getting onto the seller Community Fund, getting funding for different protocols or experiments that you might have for that. So those would be the two big pieces that I'd call out again the fast Jeep and out of control. For those who are either new to
Rust, smart contract development even is the Soroban ecosystem evolves and grows. A big gap that I have felt, as I've explored the competitive landscape, is not just teaching people how to write rust or teaching people how wasm works or educating people on DeFi protocols or AMMs, but really trying to identify where our vulnerabilities coming from. How do we write good smart contracts? Where do standards come from? With someone- like where OpenZeppelin might have come from in the Ethereum ecosystem, trying to ensure that the contracts that we're building are good. So building out games and community events for tackling specific difficult problems so they're able to arrive, a good documentation and standards for writing good smart contracts. Developing a smart contract is very different than developing just a standard application and some of those differences. I don't think we've focused enough on solving
Or teaching for, especially what the fcaoc is aiming to solve for, and then the Community Fund for funding folks that are actually doing application, startup, entrepreneurial type work. So that's those. Make sure to check those out and I will hand it back to Morgan, I believe. All right, sweet, I see here, Morgan, you got. We should definitely do weekly informal developer workshops. I think that would be awesome, and I think Matthias is slowly working on something that he's holding secret until he does, like a heart, build the beans. Matthias, I know, do you want me to share a screen here, Morgan? I think we're good. I don't have a slide to go with this, it's just gonna be my saurabhan story, I guess, and a little background as well. So no slides needed. And
Yeah, by the way, very nice shout out in the Chinese or free access to viewers if you tweet at me on Twitter, all right. So my story about story. So my developer story, going back real far, started as a kid with a Fascination with computers and I remember I was 14 when I wrote my first line of code and for me that was, you know, that experience informed what I was going to do from that point onward, and I've made a career out of it in almost 20 years of frustration, followed with the joy of seeing something that you build come to life. So that's, I guess, any developers Journey there, and the reason I'm sharing the frustration with the joy part is because I feel this industry- and I'm talking
Specifically about the blockchain industry- has not focused enough on the joy of building while providing ample frustration, and you can probably see that in your own experience there's a lot. So over the last two years, I've tried playing around with a few smart contract platforms, spending considerable amount of time with two of them and in the end I felt a little bit like Dorothy from The Wizard of Oz in a conversation with Scarecrow and Tin Man, trying to find out why one had no brain and the other one had no heart, and in my frustration, I continued looking for a platform that had both a heart and a brain. And just last November I found Soroban. The first sore bonathon was taking place and anuhe was hosting that and it was a beautiful experience. On GitHub, you log in and you know everybody's
Sort of submitting their own ideas and thoughts and experiencing the joy of development, technology and right. Yeah, so I took part in that. I've jumped right on it and I found out about Soroban in the process. I found out about XDR, which is the data format for storing things on Stellar that Soroban uses, and then I started getting into rust, and it's a long journey and doing so without prior experience, mind you. And then, lastly, was webassembly the one of the key building blocks of Soroban, and my first projects were very simple, mostly to do with optimizations of the development workflow, one workflow or another, and I made some submissions along those lines. I think it was five in total. Yeah, there
Were a lot of them. Actually, you were one of our Superstar submitters to silverwater thought, if I recall. Yeah, and it was a blast, and the community on Discord was great people were commenting and so forth. So that was a really soft and nice introduction to sort of buying. And my final project as part of sorbineathon- I think I submitted it last day- was a browser tool for interacting with the Soroban RPC server, something that a lot of folks do when interacting with any kind of blockchain. You don't go directly to a node you're running, you go to an RPC server for y'all, remote procedure call server. I remember the https from Bloomberg, gotta spell it out. So the RPC server thing: I wanted to build a great
Developer experience for anyone building and testing their contracts, because deploying the contract, invoking the contract, is often tricky if you want to do it with arguments and stuff and especially if you're sort of coming in from a command line. And in doing that I spent countless hours working on various parts of the stack, from the wasm executable to the host environment. And then it hit me. I realized something: I had everything I needed to build a self contained browser environment for executing and testing sort of on contracts. And I just sort of blew my mind like I had everything. I needed to build the perfect playground experience and so seeing how coupling webassembly, the virtual machine, together with sorbent host environment specification, enabled
That browser based developer tool that I had in mind, and many others that you can sort of picture, was my aha moment, and I just started working in seeing how I could build tools with you know, within the browser, that required no setup, no Docker. I'm no fan of like all these massive setups that take 10 minutes if you're efficient. No, nothing, just sort of log into a website and start experiencing sorbine like that and I, you know, immediately afterwards I started building it and I started debugging and engaging the community further and this was, I think, in February, when some of the programs that Tyler mentioned- SCF- I applied with use sorobond app
Because at that point it was brewing for like two months and I got in and, with the help of the Community Fund, I was able to continue building this sort of- I call it the developer playground of my dreams, because it's everything I ever wanted from a smart contract playground, and all of this happened like from scratch to launching a community funded project in less than four months- yeah, like October, not even. I think it was late November, yeah, and then there was a gap in December and sort of you know, it's like light speed. So my experience so far has been Stellar and I really appreciate the community for allowing me to go through what
I went through. So thumbs up. And yeah, that's my Soroban story. That was so wholesome and well put. Morgan, thank you for sharing that. Seriously, I think there's a question here about youth sorbom. Where can we make token contracts on new Soroban? Very soon, I will open it up. Sorry, go ahead. Yeah, I'll open it up. Next week There's a massive update and I'm working on ever since getting back from Paris and stay tuned. I'll keep you guys updated. Yeah, I mean Morgan's all into this. Y'all. Just clarify. I mean here's an awesome office now and he's like set up like an entire space and whatnot. It's a whole thing you saw about is like the next big thing here in the store of on ecosystems- you hear, you heard it here first. I see there's Matthias is saying that I'll blow your mind 2x, Morgan, thank you sore. Bomb plus test Runner plus Cooperative coding in that Dev environment. AKA vs code live
Share. There's a lot of Minds ready to be blown, I think in the next few months. There's so much Innovation happening in this space. Absolutely, I'm so excited. Thank you for everything that you do for this Arbonne ecosystem, Morgan. So, yeah, I'm gonna bring Paul back up on here. Everyone, hey, everybody, right, I'm just gonna wrap up here quick. Yeah, I hope you'll All Join the community and we can blow mines together. Smart contracts bring a ton of new Incredible use cases and power and Innovation to Stellar. All right, for me personally, you know it's a hugely exciting new piece of tech, right, like what can I say? Like I'm an engineer, you know I can say that storybond will allow us to bridge the disconnect between developers and people on the fringes of financial inclusion, right? Or that there's a lot of chances to learn, Tinker, build, earn rewards with the Adoption Fund programs, like Morgan's doing.
But what I will say is that I hope. the experimentation we're all doing will lead to building real businesses, real projects and real world use cases. On sorbonne to help further Financial inclusion: yeah, if that gets you going the same way it does me, then my job's done, cool, I can go eat dinner. But like, seriously, you know, if you're excited about this, right, you can start experimenting with Soroban right now. Right, it's live running on our experimental test net called futurenet and I want to encourage you all to consider how and where you might fit into what's coming later this year when Soroban launches for real onto Stellar's net, onto Stellar's mainnet. And if I were you, yeah, start coding right, check out you serve on. Tell your programmer friends to poke around, see if it's the right time to take a look at, Stellar. There's a QR code on the screen that'll take you to `soroban.stellar.org` that is the place to go to learn more. There's links to everything you need there: docs the Discord, join the Discord, keep up with developments. All the devs that are building Soroban every
Day are on there answering your questions. Yeah, thank you so much for your time. I can't wait to see what you'll build. Back to you new here. Thank you so much, Paul. I do want to re emphasize here the fact that we are building Soroban out there in the streets as I like to think, and not in like some laboratory. So everything is out there. Join the developer discords, be active. As Paul had said it best, everyone on the stream that is watching or will ever come across is: you're already part of the Stellar ecosystem and Community here, so come on over, start building, tinkering and let's make this a vibrant and thriving community of developers. So yeah, thank you all for joining us on the stream. Stay tuned and we'll see you in the Discord. Take care. Bye, everyone.